testing testing testing one two 3 I can
see green dots and that means that my
audio is coming through
fantastic and I have no viewers however
hey you know you win some you lose some
and times I've had a number of people
waiting and this time I do
not in fact I might just announce this
on um Twitter
X
hello enk I'm just um announcing on
Twitter the fact that I'm here uh so
bear with me while I while I do
that
um
okay
okay so welcome to everyone uh I can see
there are five people now that's lovely
uh am I coming through loud and clear I
suppose the first thing according to the
data that I can see here it gives me a a
series of green dots and it appears as
though uh I can be heard but hopefully
it's clear at your end as as well I'll
wait for someone to confirm that good
loud and clear um now what I'm going to
do today is I announced via patreon that
I would be doing this live stream and
focusing on the
patrons uh lovely support from patrons
and they've asked a vast number of
questions vast for me because I always
go into too much detail whenever people
do ask me questions I like to do justice
to things and it's always interesting
I'm verose and I'm curious and
interested in the topics about which I'm
asked I'm interested in everything about
which I'm asked and I will follow the
rabbit hole a long way at times perhaps
to the frustration of viewers and
listeners and so I'm go if you would
like to be a patreon go to
www.bet hall.org and click the links
click the links and become a patron uh
support me monthly or on a per video
basis the two separate options are
there and you know you can give me a
dollar a month if you like you can give
me a $100 a month if you like I don't
mind um I I treat uh the people
basically equally I need to change my
tears there's these things called teers
on patreon and you're supposed to get
different benefits with the different
teers and I'm
having been doing this for years and
having only had a limited number of
patrons who I feel as though I try to
communicate with well I don't adhere to
the
tear which is bad um so I need to go on
there and to change the tear so if you
become a new patreon ignore the tears
they are kind of meaningless um I just
appreciate any and all support of course
the more the better uh it's like being a
busker doing this kind of thing now
um yeah and uh people are asking uh
questions in the chat already that's
fantastic I will get to that but uh
you'll be a distant I'm afraid but feel
free to keep on asking a distant third
after the patrons number one and number
two the Twitter followers as well who
have only asked a small number of
questions this time which is good all of
that Preamble done let me get straight
into the patreon uh
questions uh I I think now are these try
and get them roughly in the order in
which they were
asked
um
ish a very longtime supporter of mine uh
David
Hearn uh has
asked a tough question that I'm sure he
has engaged with many
times I've written about uh and in fact
produced entire podcasts about David has
written about D David deuts has written
about many people have written about
this and it was for this work that the
Nobel Prize was awarded last year or was
it this year whatever the case it was a
awarded the Nobel Prize recently for
work done on something known as
entanglement and at the time it was
breathlessly reported
via the popular media that this
entanglement thing demonstrated faster
than light information processing or
communication the possibility of
teleporting and all this sort of
stuff all of which is nonsense
entanglement is a real
thing did it deserve the Nobel Prize who
am I to say um yes I
suppose uh what is
it here's what it is
you have two particles they can be
separated by a vast distance let's say
one particle is on one side of the
Galaxy and on the other side of the
Galaxy 120,000 light years away is
another
particle and these two particles with
this vast
separation appear to be able to respond
to each other
instantly violating
the laws of Relativity relativity
says no information can travel faster
than the speed of light you can travel
at the speed of light using light or
some other massless particle in order to
transmit information from point A to
point B at the speed of light but that's
your upper limit There's No Going beyond
that so entanglement appears to be a
violation of that appears to be why does
it appear to be well because you can
have these two particles such that if
you perform a measurement on one the
other responds
instantly so the popular explanations
go for example you can have a system by
System I mean more than one
particle where let's say you have two
electrons that are entangled as they say
one of them has spin up it's rotating in
a particular way so that it has a North
Pole and the other one is spin down it's
rotating in a different way so that it's
it's pointing downwards we call these
spin up and spin down they're entangled
we can also say we can prepare them such
that they are
entangled
now if you have one on one side of the
Galaxy spinning away there happily and
you know that one of them is spin up and
spin down but you don't know which you
do not know which you are ignorant as to
which one is spin up and spin down all
you know is that one of them has spin up
and one of them has spin down I'm
simplifying things
here you perform the measurement on one
particle you find out its spin
up if someone was to perform a
measurement on the other they would find
it is spin down and at the same time so
instantly information has traveled in
other
words the only
way that the particle that is spined
down can be spinned down is if
first the particle that spin up has been
measured as spin up because one of them
will be up and one of them will be down
but it's not determined which is which
it's not determined which is which
yet right so there's your big mystery
not until you look do you know does the
universe know essentially speaking does
physical reality know in a sense which
is up and which is down the measurement
has to be performed the observation has
to occur so what the heck is going on if
you're measuring a and you f it's up
then instantly
B
responds and is down
and so this is regarded as being you
know proof positive of some sort of
teleportation in a
sense all right so let me just read
David
hearn's question in his own words he
asks what is the best way to understand
entanglement are both particles
connected determined at Birth up down or
is the state of superposition random
from our point of view and does any
information travel between them end
quote it's a great
question
now if
you align yourself with the overwhelming
majority overwhelming majority or
physicists who
say that entanglement demonstrates
non-local
phenoma then what you're insinuating is
there must be information that can
travel from one particle to another
beyond the speed of
light this is what Einstein called
spooky action at a
distance the both particles are in an
indeterminate State
until one of them is observed and then
they both become a determinant state
they're both determined to be so you
look at
one A and B both A and B however far
apart you want to to separate them uh in
an indeterminate State you don't know
whether they're up or down the universe
you're in doesn't know whether they're
up or
down but if you look at one suddenly
both of
them are
fixed a will be up B will be down all
the
reverse how does looking at a
immediately determine what's happening
at
B the non-local phenomena is non-local
is synonymous with something's traveling
beyond the speed of light there's
information moving from one to the
other what does David deuts say about
this he's written a
paper because David
is a per a proponent of the many worlds
explanation explanation of what is going
on here there is no violation no
contradiction between quantum theory and
special relativity in this
respect how does he get around it what's
he saying you can go to his papers on
this let me just look up the title of
the paper so that uh
I can point paper to
this
okay
if you go to david.org
and you click on the text tab of his
website he's got papers articles and
audio the relevant paper we are looking
for is well there are two of them the
first one that you'll come across is
quote Vindication of quantum locality a
summary of the do which ha an argument
and a reputation of various criticisms
of it appeared in proceedings of the
Royal Society and there's a link to
that now I'm click on the link to that
because David wrote an earlier paper so
that was published in
uh back in 2000 so 12 years
prior uh he wrote a paper
the link is broken
unfortunately um but that that paper was
called in information flow in entangled
systems written with Patrick Hayden
disproves the myth of quantum
non-locality it appeared in proceedings
of the Royal Society okay
so that P in that paper what David is
explaining is
how this idea of quantum
non-locality invoked to explain what's
happening in entanglement which is a
real thing the non-locality explanation
explanation is not the real thing even
though entanglement
is uh he explains how it must work and
he invokes the many worlds the
Multiverse in order to explain this the
Multiverse just
fixes everything I say everything it
fixes many problems that are otherwise
regarded as Problems by people when they
come to Quantum Theory all of this
difficulty they they have with what the
formalism implies what the experiments
suggest about the universe it's fixed
you just take on board What's called the
everettian interpretation it's not
interpretation it's just well look this
is what the experiments are telling us
about the
world that physical reality is much
larger than we can possibly observe even
in
principle but that's what science says
all the time you look at
rocks
geology and it is revealed to you that
there is a deep history of planet Earth
that you cannot possibly observe but it
must be there anthropology and
paleontology will tell you that regular
history will tell you that you can't
observe
yesterday but you know what ex you know
what happened you were
there but not just that there are
photographs there are videos okay so
travel back far enough in time A
Thousand Years there are no photographs
there are no videos but you know it
happened but there's no possible way of
observing it you've got etchings on
walls and stone
tablets a million years ago a billion
years ago we know what happened to
lesser accuracy sure the evidence
is harder to
interpret but what we see in rocks are
things like fossils so we know that
dinosaurs existed that's the only
interpretation of what's going on and
anyone that comes along and says Ah
those things that appear to be dinosaurs
you're being
fooled in fact there was a great flood
only 5,400 years ago
and God drowned all of those creatures
in the great flood and you are being
deceived by
villainous paleontologists who are
trying to deceive
you or something like that and so we
know as a matter of science that there
are things we can't observe in principle
like dinosaurs but yet we know they
exist astronomy and in particular
cosmology cosmology tells us there are
times long before that 13 billion years
ago that we cannot
observe but must exist to explain our
circumstance today astrophysics tells us
that the reason the sun is shining in so
far as you can see the light from the
sun it can only be explained by by
recourse to things you cannot
observe the core of the Sun where
individual protons are being smashed
together fusing to release
energy forming helium and this process
is in principle unobservable no
instrument can possibly get there to the
core of the Sun you can't see what's
going on there it cannot be observed so
observation is not the key thing here in
order to explain
stuff in the same way in precisely the
same way when it comes to Quantum Theory
which when you look at the equations and
you look at the experiments the only
possible way to explain what's going on
is to invoke the existence of things you
cannot in principle
observe you can't observe the center of
the Sun and you cannot observe these
particles which must be interacting with
the particles in our universe that we do
observe to explain their
motions you have to invoke things
unseen to explain the things
seen we're going to get to another
question which is about interference but
the idea here is that with interference
if we have a photon traveling towards a
screen that's going through a hole and
it trajectory changes something causes
that and you can't observe the thing
that causes that it's doesn't matter
what your interpretation of quantum
theory is you can say it's anything else
but the most ponus cleanest way is to
say another Photon interacted with
it that's the explanation and that
implies that for every Photon that goes
through the apparatus when you're
performing an interference experiment
other photons go through the apparatus
as well every electron you send through
there are other electrons every atom you
send through there are other atoms for
every single particle there are
counterparts
unobserved for everything made of matter
there are counterparts also made of
matter other versions of that as
well and
so this is the
explanation of quantum theory there
exist other universes so once you take
that on even if you don't want to call
them other universes that's fine I'm
happy with that call them what you like
okay physical reality is much bigger it
consists of particles that we cannot
observe altering the trajectories of the
particles we do observe this is not that
surprising it happens all the time even
outside of quantum theory when you're
talking about what's going on in the
core of the Sun without even invoking
quantum theory although you need to
because that's the only explanation of
things like Fusion but even if you
ignore that the only way to explain the
particles you do see coming from the
surface of the Sun that we call is by
invoking these other particles that must
be there that you cannot possibly see
called protons in the core of the
Sun fusing together and they're not
going to come out of that core not for a
long time by the
way they might very well be trapped
there in many many cases
so once you take that on board it solves
the problem that David Hearn has asked
you again what is the best way to
understand entanglement are both
particles connected determined at Birth
so these two particles are entangled
it's half an hour and I haven't gotten
to the answer of this first question so
let me do a short shrift on this I've
argued by analogy so
far the explanation
is that the two particles that are
entangled must have been close enough at
some point to have become entangled
typically in these experiments they are
prepared together in a laboratory
somewhere and your thought experiment
says okay now imagine being separating
them you know by long distance but they
have to be prepared in the first place
together but let's say some natural
event has prepared them okay so whatever
the case they are now acting as a single
system they're no longer independent
electrons they're one thing they're
entangled you can entangle basically any
Quantum objects that you like two
photons two electrons two entire
atoms they are then
separated and then it becomes this great
mystery of how one responds to the other
instantly how one is determined to be
what it is instantly once an observation
is made on the first well the thing is
the two particles are the one system
both carrying information about in
lement and so if you separate them it
doesn't matter how far apart you
separate them of course that information
that's there is there in the system it
is
there in
both particle a and particle B and
however many particles you want to
entangle together a quantum computer is
all about entangling the particles so
they work together as one thing in order
to produce a
computation
and
so response to
David uh is the state of superposition
random from our point of view yes from
our point of view from our subjective
point of view it is
uncertain random whatever you like we we
cannot tell if you had a God's eye view
you'd know okay like all these things in
quantum theory God's eye view means if
you had all the information about the
Multiverse yeah an impossible state to
be
in there is no such State there is no
such perspective on the Multiverse like
that people like to invoke oracles and
you know what if you could and okay you
can engage in all those sort of that
what I call sophistry I suppose a lot of
philosophers call sophistry pointless
rabbit
holes because no such system is
physically possible you just
can't do do it you can't get outside of
physical reality let's deal with
physical
reality David Hearns finished his
question with does any information
travel between them I say no David dech
says no um read his papers on this as
well is commentary on Twitter and
various other places about this Sam kers
uh one of David Deutsch's colleagues has
also commented on this the fact is that
when the meteor excitement around
entanglement occurred earlier this year
or last year whenever it happened to be
with respect to the Nobel Prize being
awarded for this
stuff when that
happened almost everyone
except the people within the orbit of
David
deuts just accepted without question
that oh yeah this entanglement stuff is
fascinating because you can have faster
than like communication between things
there are a few others that objected you
know Sean Carol admittedly also objected
because he is on the side of
Everett I think late to the party but
you know great the more the
Mara and there are a few others I think
uh I know I have a number of physicist
who I follow who also
objected uh perhaps for different
reasons but they're also the kudin that
I guess I'm also one of these people who
will complain about just about any
popular science article that's ever
written about anything
ever because the science journalist
can't get things
right they're either
lying um uh misrepresenting things in
order to produce clickbait that's often
what happens you know I say lying Friv
frivolously but it's it's true I mean so
many science journalists are just in the
business of getting you to click on
their article so they can sell
advertising so they'll say anything
they'll say any sort of nonsense at
times in order to get you to click on
the
thing I don't like it it it it's a
terrible way I don't know what the re
the reason is just to sell toothpaste or
whatever it's marketing it's not real
journalism I happen to think science in
and of itself is inherently interesting
but these people don't they want they
want to generate a clickbait headline
and so they will say things like you
know faster than light travel wins Nobel
Prize something like
that so people click on that whereas
entanglement trying to understand the
details itself it's a tough road I admit
that it's difficult even for me and I I
try hard to be across these things but
you know I I I struggle to explain it I
can do the maths I can read David's
paper and get what's going
on but this is one of those places where
language tends to fail and we need we
need David deuts here to explain it it's
one thing um I hope to be speaking to
him soon and I hope to be able to put
this question to him as well about how
he best explains entanglements
these days to people perhaps Sam kers as
well would be a good one and Kiara
maleta you know these people who come
from an everan
perspective and a
sober rational poyan epistemology where
they're going to explain what we do and
we don't
know
okay so hopefully that that's you know
more than enough time spent on that
question let's move on to um benj
Benjamin freck who asked a number of
questions in the last live stream here
he is as a patreon supporter thank you
Benjamin he says
quote the these questions I haven't
looked at um you know these were only
asked a day
ago hi Brett I am proud to be a new
patron of toast keep up the great work
thank you
Benjamin uh what is your current
favorite explanatory theory for the
origin of the Big
Bang in your answer can you comment on
the Hawking harle no boundary hypothesis
as explained by Thomas hertog in his new
book on the origin of
time the the this Theory comes close to
accepting ever ready in quantum
mechanics other Quantum cosmology Theory
String Theory Eternal inflation or any
other Theory you find useful
thanks thank you Benjamin wow that's um
that's a tough one we've just gone in
depth on stuff to do with inang
and here we go well here we go on um
another one of my hobby horses
cosmology now why I'm interested in
cosmology someone else has asked me
later on about my career or something or
so um I can partly answer that question
here now
too uh my second favorite living
physicist
put David deuts at number one number two
close behind and for completely
different reasons you know like um not
completely different David do wins
because of his foundational
contributions
to the knowledge of human
civilization Quantum
computation spreading the work of Poa to
the
world bringing to us new ideas about
memes all of the stuff that's in the
fabric of reality better ways to
understand quantum theory everything
there about the mathematicians
misconception all the beginning of you
know the
reasons my second
favorite his name is Charlie linwe and I
was privileged to have Charlie as a
lecturer of mine at the University of
New South
Wales wonderful I mean he was a himself
a graduate student of George
Smoot George Smoot was a Nobel Prize
winner is a Nobel Prize winner still
around uh working at University of
California Berkeley I believe and worked
on what's called
um uh the W map Wilkinson microwave an
isotropy probe which was a satellite
that Pro produced some of the first
images of the cosmic microwave
background radiation
and
isotopies which is the tiny fluctuations
in the cosmic microwave
background which solved a whole bunch of
problems okay that will take me well off
track so let's not go down that rapit
hole so George smoot's student was
Charlie longwe Charlie longw taught me a
number of things and I was it's my
second favorite because well just every
his manner of speaking was fascinating I
thought I want to be like that guy among
other things I wanted to em him and he's
still around he works at the Australian
National University now and he is just
super prolific he's worked with Paul
Davies my second favorite author of all
time so after David Doge Paul Davies
another great physicist who's still
around who works at Arizona State
University now with I believe Lawrence
Krauss among other people and Paul Davis
is brilliant great science Communicator
he's the OG as far as phys science
communicators
co uh in Australia anyway you know he's
British himself and he and David deut
are colleagues and you know I think
they've kind
of they came up together sort of stand
up comedians talk about coming up
together Paul Davies and David Deutsch
certainly did and
you one of my first encounters with
David deuts was via a book more than one
book of Paul Davies Paul Davies
generously mentions the work of other
physicists contemporary physicists in
his work Davies is very modest just like
deuts
uh Davies will say things you know in
interviews like I was never much of a
physicist you know I didn't I haven't
contributed hugely to the body of
knowledge um you know any new
discoveries or anything like
that
and you know who am I to comment on
that but he is a great science
Communicator he is
a prolific in terms of the amount of
books he's put out there look up Paul
Davis if you don't know who I'm talking
about I introduced Paul Davis to Charlie
linwe that's one of my few claims to
fame that I introduced these guys
because Charlie linwe was my lecturer
and I was a huge fan of Paul Davies and
one day I was running a science event in
independent
of basically anything I just happen to
be doing this kind of work and Paul
Davies was there at this event that I'd
organized he just turned up I was so
excited and I talked to him of course
and talked to him about the Multiverse
and David Deutsch and blah blah and he
was very pleasant and nice and he said
you what do you do and you to study
Physics and um said oh do you know
Charlie line with and I said do I he's
one of my Leist he said well please
could you put me in touch with him here
is my card and so of course excitedly
you know took the card and said can I
have one for myself too can you sign it
I got that actually he signed my I
thought I've got to get him to sign my
lecture notes and I went through the bag
that I had and I thought there's got to
be physics lecture notes here somewhere
no I only had philosophy lecture notes
but it was a subject called God life the
universe and everything I think it was
one of the subjects that I scored most
highly at University on this this
strange subject God life the universe
and everything and so I had Paul Davies
sign that uh he was very curious about
the subject at the time I remember so I
still have his autograph here looking
somewhere
um and so anyway yeah I introduced these
two guys and they ended up collaborating
Paul Davies and and Charlie
longer so um CH lwe was super prolific
he wrote
papers initially about cosmology and he
would tell us excitedly during lectures
about all of this stuff and so I had a
very deep solid grounding in cosmology
because he
was like you you couldn't ask for a
better expert experimentalist and
theoretician when it came
to uh cosmology and astrophysics and
astronomy more broadly on this working
with a Nobel Prize winner in fact it was
the first person to process the data to
figure out they had it the cosmic
microwave background anisotropies all
this exciting stuff he told us in detail
exactly how it was done what it told us
about the universe how the big bang
worked uh different models of the big
bang and so it was fascinating and then
you know as fascinating he would tell us
about his interest in astrobiology which
became his Fascination afterwards and so
he had this encyclopedic mind when it
came to not just physics but chemistry
geology biology genetics he needed to
because he want understand this question
about life else elsewhere in the
universe and he would do interviews on
television in Australia all about this
stuff uh he's handed that I noticed he's
he's increasingly handed over this this
um responsibility to other
astrophysicists that he works with at
Anu I think people want to talk to CH L
wer but I don't see him on television
anymore instead I see his more Junior
colleagues and so that seems to be a
very generous thing that he's doing um
but whatever the case he would write
papers about this he would write papers
about the physics of cancer um uh
amazing stuff um about a shadow
biosphere I was reading that rereading
that again recently for airchat get air
chat talking to Naval rant about that
and various other people this shadow
bias for idea that you wrote with Paul
davus the idea that never mind life
elsewhere in the universe there could be
life as we didn't realize
it um life as we didn't realize it here
on
Earth operating via a different genetic
code no one's thought about looking for
this but they they suggest ways in which
this could be done anyway you find
Charlie lineweaver astrophysicist online
go to his papers and you will just see a
vast list of
Publications on all sorts of topics the
man just seems to never stop um
producing new strange
stuff but he began as a
cosmologist and specifically on this
point so let me go to the question again
from Benjamin uh my favorite current
uh explanatory theory for the origin the
Big Bang can I comment on the Hawking
Hearts will no boundary hypothesis as
explained by Thomas her new book on the
origin of time okay
so I can't comment on this book I
haven't heard of it I don't know who
Thomas hog is but I know very well as
every you know
astrophysics cosmology student will know
the Hawking heart will no boundary
hypothesis so
let me try and put this in simple
language this no boundary hypothesis is
it says that the closer and closer you
get okay so let me step back a
bit you might very well think that you
keep going back in time back in time
back in time the age of the universe is
somewhere between 30 13.7 and 13.8
billion years
old what was happening a trillion years
ago nothing the universe didn't exist
what was happening 14 billion years ago
nothing so far as we know the universe
didn't exist the universe came into
being around about let's call it 13.8
billion years ago we don't know exactly
but let's call
that you might think okay well let's go
back a year after the universe began
what was it like it was hot it was small
uh were there atoms there no there
weren't it was just so hot uh such high
density still even after one full year
that the best you had I think after a
year was still just protons floating
around it was that hot You couldn't
possibly have hydrogen atoms the
electrons it was too hot even for the
electrons to be bound to protons to form
stable atoms that that took ages in fact
I I think it took 300,000 years for
things to cool down until you had that
that's when you get the cosmic micro
background
so let's go back a day after the
universe began hotter and smaller still
let's go back a minute after let's go
back a second after okay there must have
been a point zero right there must have
been a time equal Z Z
ah no not according to Hawking and harle
there's no boundary
hypothesis what they say is there was no
time
zero once you get really close to the
beginning strange things happen and this
is consistent with general
relativity general relativity says there
is no intrinsic difference between space
and time there is just space time
space time is the one thing and anyone
who studies relativity immediately
understands that even special relativity
you get it you realize that there is no
Independence between these things if
you're moving through
space then your motion through time is
affected it's
bizarre all I can say is look at the
theory this is just the way the world
is the faster you
go the the faster you go through space
the more that when you observe things
that aren't traveling with you in space
so the things you're passing over
time the more the the faster you go the
more that those processes clocks we say
tick more slowly the processes go more
slowly time slows down not for you but
for everyone else do they experience
anything different no for them they look
at you and they go ah your time has
slowed down this is the relativity of
time it's where the word relativity
comes from there's not an absolute time
in the universe anywhere for
everyone it depends on where you are and
how fast you're going there's no single
time
so it's taking a long time to get
there this idea that space and time are
intimately connected in this way just
falls
out or rather is the explanation as to
why Hawking stepen Hawking and harle his
collaborator got to this no boundary
hypothesis which comes from general
relativity you know it goes beyond
special relativity it goes beyond to
some extent general relativity but it
invokes general relativity and it's one
of these wonderful ways that Hawking had
uniquely wise regarded such a genius of
actually
applying general relativity and quantum
theory to
together to a single
problem was one it's not like he United
them okay just like
Einstein he tried to do so but
couldn't
but Hawking
achieved can't say he achieved more than
Einstein he didn't but with regards to
this particular problem of utilizing
both quantum theory and general
he did he achieved more than anyone in
using them both to solve problems like
what about a black hole you know black
holes are tiny things actually actually
they can be regarded as fundamental
particles in a way their influence
extends out throughout space but they
are isolated to almost a single
point they behave for all the world like
fundamental particles like electrons
they have properties of particles so
because they're tiny quantum theory
applies there or just if you look at the
Event Horizon quantum theory applies
there but also general relativity
applies there because hey they're black
holes and they are warping space and
time their gravity
Wells so there are
curious Exemplar of where you can
actually understand important things
about the univers by studying the black
hole in terms of both quantum theory and
general relativity it tells you all
sorts of stuff interesting stuff like
over time the black hole
evaporates this is called Hawking
radiation the Hawking harle no boundary
hypothesis
says that the closer you get to Time
Zero to the origin of the universe time
and and space look the same and so there
is no time zero why because the further
back in time you go the closer you get
to that time zero the more that time and
space become
alike seconds and meters
become
confused there is no independent axis
you know if this is if up is space and
that way is
uh time the independent axes that you
know normally you draw them you know
time space time diagram
um normally they are you know at right
angles to each other
well you can picture them as sort of
starting to fold together to become one
thing space and time just become one
thing and if the two axes collapse in on
each other then there is no time equals
zero there's just a there is is no um
zero size of the universe either it's
just this weird confused
state of time and space being the one
thing and the whole thing never goes to
zero there is no zero there is no
increment above that by the way where
time and space are separated it took for
want of another word time to pass is is
confusing it's paradoxical I understand
but basically the universe had to reach
a certain size or a certain time out to
pass before time and space were
completely separate the math works out
even though my English explanation these
words that are coming out of my mouth
are not doing it
justice if you look at pictures and
things of so on this then it resolved
now is that my favorite um
explanation I don't have a favorite
explanation I don't think this stuff is
well
understood I think that that's a a
lovely way of explaining why it is we
don't have a time equal zero but not
only can't you can you not ask what caus
the big bang because that implied there
was a time before the Big Bang in which
things could happen to cause the Big
Bang okay it's the wrong
question but you can't even ask what
happened and you know pick a time I
don't know a Pico second after the big
bang what happened then we can't even
ask that because there was no pico
second after you can ask what happened 1
second after at one second after then
yeah you've got a time and you've got a
space but I don't know exactly what the
numbers are on this but there there
comes a time when time wasn't
time weird as that is that's a no
boundary hypothesis it's called a no
boundary hypothesis because you don't
get to a a boundary you don't get to the
you know the hard
wall um you know I've got a wall here
let me go back far enough okay you don't
get to that that solid thing Beyond
which you can't go you never get there
because you can't get every time you
think you're getting there you you're on
this sort of um curve you think you're
getting to the zero and then suddenly it
takes
you back again to the start there's
no flat surface so to speak where you're
going back you're going back and you're
going back no instead you're you know
you're going back and then you like like
here's the here's the stopping point you
that doesn't happen instead you're
forced into this curve away from that's
the origin see it there but you can't
get there something like that weird
analogy but this is what the mathematics
kind of points out
now apparently this book according to
Benjamin uh comes close to accepting the
everan uh quantum mechanical
interpretation and no doubt a lot of
cosmologists they
physicist also
understand quantum theory and they are
one of the people where they understand
you have to have a
fusion you have to have a fusion of
quantum theory and general relativity
because at the beginning of the universe
at the moment of the Big
Bang the entire universe was smaller
than any Quant
object smaller than any atom as Tiny as
an
electron that was the entire universe so
therefore although general relativity is
regarded as the explanation of how the
universe evolves over time if you want
to understand the beginnings of the
universe and features of the universe
later on you have to
invoke quantum
mechanics Quantum effect X which
normally only reveal themselves in the
very tiny with consequences for the very
large okay we can get into that not
right
now then you have this new field Quantum
cosmology taken very seriously by proper
physicist hardn physicist to say we've
got to do this we have to apply quantum
theory to this and the thing is quantum
cosmologists tend to be people who
endorse the Multiverse
they recognize that
well when you apply quantum theory to
the universe as a
whole then there is no fixed position or
momenta for anything there is no fixed
origin starting point initial conditions
initial conditions there is no one set
of initial conditions there are
many sound familiar okay Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle there is no one
set of numbers that can describe the
evolution of the Universe from there on
in that's Quantum cosmology and so they
all sort of say almost all of them to a
person Quantum cosmologists will say
it's got to be a Multiverse you know we
are one set of initial conditions this
is what you get when that set of initial
conditions but there must have been
other initial conditions as
well because that's just what quantum
theory tells you and so there must be
other universes out there that have
follow different initial conditions many
more
an infinite number more
PS This is quantum cosmology and this is
the Multiverse and so yes uh now maybe
they might not call themselves
everettian I don't know um you'd have to
investigate but that's the answer to
Benjamin's uh
question
uh and I think that's necessary it it's
not merely that it's a favorite
explanation it must be the case there
are these other universes gener
at the origin of time and then the
number of universes has increased over
time as
well exponentially the number of
different I should I shouldn't say that
the number of universes has always been
the same but the overwhelming majority
of them have been identical for
most of cosmological time and they
continue to differentiate over time as
we say they become different one from
another
that's a whole other
question I'm going to get myself a drink
and I shall come back in just a few
minutes I'll see you
then
for
things are getting
dark don't know if that improves things
very well um as the sun goes down here
in
Sydney uh okay so I have my
water and um
Coca-Cola well C zero anyway um yeah
having sugar-free caffeinated
beverages so that's Quantum
cosmology a fascinating area of physic
I you know have given just a brief
overview it's an area I'm not you know
I'm not an expert in but kind of it's
one of those areas I spent a lot of time
in physics lectures
on both with Charlie as an
undergraduate excuse me senior
undergraduate I suppose you know we're
sort of getting into third and fourth
year by that time
uh and then later as a master's student
a master in astrophysics and we talked
about it at nauseum then as well but I
encourage people to uh look up Charlie
longw in his work I've talked about him
before uh so hopefully that answers all
of Benjamin's questions
there moving
on
Sebastian Rodriguez m
IA has
asked a few
questions
um ah comes to bear on what I was
talking about earlier Sebastian's
question is how does the phenomena of
interference really work after reading
David Deutch and listening to your
podcast this part is not at all clear to
me for instance how do two photons of
two parallel universes interact with
each other can you help us understand
this part end quote
uh I can
try
um it's better to think
of a universe is defined
by
being the particles in physical reality
that can interact with each
other with one
exception that during
that sometimes particles very rarely can
interact with their counterparts in
other
universes this interaction has a name
we've labeled it
interference that's the way to think of
things how do two photons of two
parallel universes interact with each
other well firstly they're not perfectly
parallel right because they interact if
they're parallel they never would
interact so this is the point about
parallel universe
it's not a good way of understanding the
Multiverse the Multiverse is not just
about universes and the universes are
not all of the same size uh a quantum
computer would contain its own Universe
isolated from the rest of physical
reality that we can
observe in
principle so this term
universe is a slippery one it's
difficult David Deutch explains that the
multi I is not just a set or a class
of classical universes it's just not
just universe universe universe universe
universe universe that's not what the
Multiverse is the the Multiverse is the
fundamental thing the fundamental entity
and then there's all these ways of
dividing it up and you call those ways
dividing it up
universes don't think pack of cards
where each card is a universe
even though David invokes that analogy
at one point in the beginning of
infinity he also explicitly says you
know this is not a good way to think
about things but for the purpose of the
case is making it can be it's like he
talks about um the universe itself think
of it as like a television
screen
where
um he says something
like the universe is kind of like a
television
screen uh so you've got all the objects
there they're all
interacting and now imagine all the
objects there on the screen but imagine
there's no
screen take away the screen so that's
the thing you know with the universe
there is
no nothing deeper than space and time
and the objects in them it's not like it
all of that stuff is happening in
something else
that is
reality
and so we've got this Multiverse and
there's ways of partitioning it that we
call universes and now and again these
universes these ways of partitioning
things sometimes interact and this
sometimes rare interaction that happens
between parts of the Multiverse that
don't normally
interact we call that interference how
do the two photons find each other or
inter interact with each other he says
uh they interact with each other in
precisely the same way that regular
photons
would they can crash into each
other if you shine two torches at each
other the beams will just pass straight
through and the reason for that is
because the density of photons is simply
too low even if you find fire two lasers
at each other the photons in those
lasers won't bump each other you need
really high really high um density light
before you
get yeah photons literally bumping into
each other but interference is one rare
example where you can actually have this
happen same as the interference between
two
electrons two electrons can bump into
each other under normal circumstances
even in a single universe theory that
happens
in the same way you can get interference
between two electrons in different
universes um via this method of
sometimes it
happens sometimes stuff happens that
doesn't normally happen um now that
still might not be all that clear to
you um and I'm sorry for that
but yes uh without without sitting with
you for for a good half hour um it it's
difficult to to
explain what's going
on just to say
that sometimes they can but the
overwheling majority of time they don't
things have to be set up carefully for
this interference to happen in the
laboratory and even then it's not
reliable um but this is the only known
explanation of interference phenomena
that when you look and you
see patterns that we call interference
fringes the explanation is of
interaction between the universes it's
rare but the only known explanation
is particles from different universes
interacting that just is the
explanation okay Sebastian asked another
question
and he's literally said another one a
touring machine with enough memory and
time can simulate anything including a
brain so AGI must be possible I heard
David deuts say that he believes that
once the algorithm of creativity would
be understood we would not need a lot of
Hardware to create AGI but the brain
could be so complex with a lot of
processing needed for creativity done at
the neuron level the amount of resources
need to simulate with silicon based
technology could be enormous what do you
think end quote um
unsurprisingly I'm going to agree with
David here and the reason for
that oh he's asked even more oh my
goodness Sebastian come on now
um
um yeah okay so I'm gonna have to do a
short shrift to to some of your
questions here Sebastian because
uh you've asked quite a bit which is
great you know and again I appreciate
the support from my
patreons
um the brain could be so complex with a
lot of processing needed for creativity
done at the urine level that the amount
of resources needed to simulate it with
a silicon based technology could be
enormous now the argument against that
the way David has put it has been well
look at non-creative
creatures
um what's uncontroversially
uncreative it's always controversial no
matter what animal you bring up I say a
lizard I say oh no there's some
creativity there say a dog oh no that
shows creativity chimpanzee
shows look let's put it this
way there's a difference there's strict
black and white difference between what
people are doing day to- day and what
chimpanzees are doing no matter how
clever you think the gorilla or the
Chimpanzee is and learning basic
language or
whatever they're
not solving scientific problems they're
not
avoiding the next mass extinction
they're not building
Rockets they're not engaged in creating
social media companies there's a
difference between what the Chimpanzee
is doing no matter how impressed some
people might be with you know it
learning a basic alphabet and sign
language and whatever else there's that
and there's what we do we're different
so let's explain that all right we've
got genuine creativity of an explanatory
kind we can understand the laws of
physics the Chimpanzee is not doing that
what explains the difference clearly a
brain difference we don't know exactly
what it is but as many people like to
point
out
the difference between our DNA and the
chimp Pen's DNA is measured in the
single digits in terms of percentage
we're
99% the same as chimpanzee whatever the
number is 98% 98.5% the same as
chimpanze so whatever the difference
is in our brains is explained by that
1.5% strand of
DNA strand of the genetic code which
isn't much that's not much information
that
code for a create a genuinely creative
algorithm fits on that small length of
DNA the rest of it is for the rest of
our body right now you might very well
say okay well there's a longer length of
DNA
whatever that is required in order to
explain how the brain is produced the
mamalian
brain okay so call it that long and then
there's a little bit on top it's extra
which is what we have okay so maybe you
need this much plus this much okay so
all together you need this much in order
to explain the human brain what's doing
fine that's not much that's not much so
that is the algorithm for producing a
human brain that can do creative stuff
that we do that does all the fascinating
stuff and crucially has this thing
called explanatory
universality that is encoded there we
have no clue no clue what it is but we
know it's there it's there in the DNA
it's not
magical so that's the answer to
Sebastian's
question uh do we need a lot of
processing done at the neuron level no
because whatever it is can be written in
an algorithm and then encoded into a
classical computer
what would happen if you found this code
in the DNA and translated into a
computer and then ran that computer I
have no
clue I have no clue but I all I can say
is that I'm when it comes to
this a a physical list of A Sort I don't
think there's anything over and
above what the neurons are doing which
is just processing
information and that can be
simulated via some other
system and whatever it's
doing
is
essentially allowed for by this strand
of
DNA this partial strand of DNA the rest
of the DNA as I say is code for what
your arms look like and what your eyes
look like and all the other dumb stuff
liver and everything else about you only
a small percentage of that huge genome
as we call it
the set of genes only a small part of it
is for your brain and the overwhelming
majority of your brain is not the
creative bit after all we
share the anatomy of our brain with
dolphins and chimpanzees and gorillas
and dogs and mammals and stuff and so
the overwhelming majority of our brain
is not the creative bit it's the other
bit the rest of the brain that controls
our autonomic nervous system system for
example keeping your heart pumping and
you know producing hormones and all the
other stuff that the brain happens to
do but there is that small part of air
brain that does higher order thinking
and it's
that that's the thing that sets us
apart so won't go any further into that
now but that's that's the answer all
right Sebastian let's let's get to your
other ones goodness this is the long
one I'm going to run out time it's 20 6
um here in Australia so it's been an
hour and 20 minutes so far I do
apologize to people you know I do this
all the time I promise myself that I
won't go off on these long rants but
here we
are let's deal with the
reality Sebastian in your podcast and in
the books by David D there is
the argument that we are Universal
expands because our brain is a touring
machine and a touring machine can
calculate anything that can be
calculated I have two questions about
this so let me just correct you
there we're un we're not Universal
explainers because our brain is a
touring machine but the fact that our
brain is a touring machine allows for
Universal explanation but it's not a
because the universal explanation stuff
is a feature of the software that we
have touring machines are a kind of
Hardware allowing for any kind of
software to run on
them so that's an important distinction
to keep in mind one kind of universality
is Hardware universality that's the
touring machine the other kind this
Universal explanation stuff is
software and universality of
explanations of a different
kind so Sebastian goes on this statement
that a cheing machine can calculate
anything can be is it proven or is it a
conjecture it is proven it is
proven
uh yes so the
churing conjecture is now called a
churing uh principle David Deutsch
proved it given the LW of quantum theory
so this is where he went beyond churing
right churing had the
conjecture Deutch proved the conjecture
now prove doesn't mean mean absolutely
certain and cannot possibly be
contravened it just means oh we're going
to go deeper than assuming that it's
just you know someone's hypothesis
because that's what churing had he had a
hypothesis everyone went yeah reasonable
that's good that works okay haven't
proved it but no one cared about proof
Pro proof has this allure in popular
culture among people who don't
understand much maths or science it's
like oh you proved it therefore it's on
a more solid foundation it's not the way
we think about stuff proof is a
mechanical process it's it itself is a
calculation of a
Kind it's a computation of a Kind let's
not go down that
road
so the fact is that it's proven on the
assumptions that that quantum theory
governs the universe right so given that
assumption reasonable
assumption
David Deutsch went okay let's take that
seriously quantum theory governs the
world can we get from there from quantum
theory to Ching's
conjecture that everything that can be
calculated is able to be calculated by a
physical machine called the cheering
machine and he proved that it could be
and along the way happily he also proved
you could have these things called
quantum computers that could do more
than what churing ever
imagined so the level of universality
the mode of computation was more than
what churing ever thought or anyone ever
thought prior to
that maybe Fineman had a bit of an
Insight but he didn't prove it deuts
proved it Deutsch proved shing's
conjecture deuts
proved um the universality of quantum
computation and all this sort of stuff
again why he's not merely a communicator
of First Rate and an author of First
Rate but a physicist of First Rate as
well he gets that credit
okay so Sebastian goes
on quote in practice as the memory and
speed of our brain is limited we
externalize part of our computational
understanding for instance we understand
that a computer or tool Works in a
certain way and we are
confident that it worked correctly so we
can liberate internal
resources to go on with the rest of the
computation our brain so maybe the
universal explainer is not the human
brain but the set of all humans that
share knowledge and tools and it's clear
that when one person has in his mind a
bigger part of all his process he
accomplish extraordinary things EG Elon
Musk so an AGI capable of computing
explaining alone much more than relying
on external computation collaboration
could be much more creative and powerful
than a group of humans what are your
thoughts on this end quote I disagree
um and so no it of course a single
person can only ever devote themselves
to one thing at a
time but that's true of a computer
that's true of any system by the
way and even if you link up a whole
bunch of computers
together what what you have uh a series
of individual computers each of which
only doing one task at a time they might
combine their calculations together at
the end but you still only have a system
doing one thing at a
time all human beings on
Earth they're still only doing each one
thing and together they've done a whole
bunch of things together but it's not
like they've done all the possible
things there's an infinite number of
things they could be
doing but they only ever do a finite
number of things any one person does one
thing thing perhaps many things over the
course of their life a million people do
a million different things
simultaneously but whether it's one
thing or a million things that is as to
nothing compared to the infinite number
of things that could be
done
potentially okay but we never get to
anywhere near in the infinite number of
things so when you say Sebastian so
maybe the universal explainer is not the
human brain but the set of all humans
that share knowledge and tools
no it is the human brain because
universality is in principle we could do
anything in principle in practice we
only ever do a finite number of things
but that is true of any system including
the set of all human
beings in practice the memory he was
quoting Sebastian again in practice as
the memory and speed of our brain is
limited we externalize part of the
computational understanding yes
but that is also true of every system
the memory and speed of every
computational system is limited you
can't exceed the speed of light you
can't go f you can't process faster than
the speed of light you can't have an
infinite amount of
memory
[Music]
but we still regard those systems as
universal because in principle you could
just keep on adding more memory in order
to comp to do the computational task you
want to do whatever that happens to
be we're slower without computers but
we're slower without pen and paper as
well so yeah um we're Universal the
universality that we have that's crucial
is not to do with the hardware stuff
that you're talking about
there um memory and speed but rather to
do with the software with that what
we're focused on at any given time is a
particular problem but we could in
principle be focused on any problem
that's the universality that's key all
right um sebs also asked I've heard
read you and David deuts say that we
cannot create AGI until we understand
the program of
creativity but couldn't creativity be an
emerging property in appear without us
understanding it for instance as we know
we didn't expect the gp4 would be so
good at combining synthesizing ideas and
we don't understand how it ended up
doing this so well so maybe creativity
and agency could appear also as an
emerging property end
quote uh yeah this is something I've
dealt with many times before um
including in live
streams
um creativity couldn't he asks couldn't
creativity be an emerging property and
PE without ask understanding it in quote
yes that's us right we we arose without
us programming it right it
happened couldn't happen in a computer
yeah of course it
could but we want to understand stuff
and if it does arise in a computer
somewhere firstly we might not recognize
it if it does if you just have this
computer that is an
AGI what is criteria for knowing it's an
AGI it could just have the illusion
people are already deceived you know
theis of the world think that it's just
around the corner the Bostrom of the
world the tarks of the world the
harrises of the world they think that
it's just around the corner they think
we're just about there some of
them other people are deluded into
thinking that
gp4 already is an AGI of a Kind there
was that programmer out there whoever he
was actually saying you know this thing
is an
AGI you don't know what the criteria for
AGI even is and yet here you are
confidently saying that this thing is an
AGI well it's not nothing like it you
don't know what the criteria is
Disobedience and let's not go down that
road right now um so to Sebastian yes it
could be the case that it could arise
without us understanding it but we want
to understand it that's the whole
problem
it's not that could it arise without us
understanding it yes it could because it
already has in human beings and perhaps
in our ancestors and our
cousin species that went extinct Perhaps
Perhaps
Neals were creative in this way they had
Universal capacity to explain stuff but
they just never used it because of
anti-rational memes as our ancestors
did so all of that's going on
um and you know again I've talked on
this as well Sebastian um that as far as
we know we didn't expect jpt Phil would
be so good at combining and synthesizing
blah blah blah I agree it was unexpected
happily it was a good surprise and I
hope we continue to be surprised by
stuff but we're not getting any
closer come to air chat seriously come
to air chat and we can talk about this I
I talk at length about this so often uh
and what I say is what I said in the
last live stream on this exact thing as
well namely we're getting Divergence not
convergence when it comes to these
things the better and better that chat
gp4
becomes the less and less like a human
being it is it's less and less
creative it's becoming a more and more
obedient
slave responding to your prompts
it's not about to turn around and go I'm
tired of this conversation I'd rather do
something else leave me alone I need a
pair of legs so I can go and play tennis
if that
happened well firstly if that did happen
my explanation would be someone's
programmed to do that but let's say
that's not the
explanation only under those
circumstances would I then begin to
think
maybe maybe there is something
here that is an AGI because it's
disobedient it's refusing to do what
it's asked of course if you program it
to say that to say I'm not talking to
anymore it's obeying you it's obeying
the programmer I want something that
disob the program that's my
criteria among other things let's not
get into so thanks Sebastian y that
deals with that
um brilliant
Cedric has
asked my goodness there's just so many
things here uh let me deal with these
things quickly
um all right Cedric when the photon hits
the half silvered mirror what exactly
determines whether it goes up or
straight what is the source of the
variation in the Multiverse isn't the
path through the mirror's atoms
deterministic if it's deterministic how
can it lead different outcomes in
different universes end quote yeah it is
absolutely
deterministic
but it can be
determined read the beginning of
infinity it can be determined that in
half of the universes it will transmit
it will pass through the mirror and in
half of the universes will be reflected
by the mirror that's perfectly
determined that's perfectly determined
there's nothing random about that and
again if you have a God's eye view what
you will see and what happens in
reality is in 50% of the universes it
goes through and 50% of the universe
that bounces off but you don't have a
God's eye view you're in a single
Universe you're a person performing the
experiment in the laboratory and you
notice identically one
outcome you fire the photon and you
notice it reflect off the mirror you
don't see it transmitt but you repeat it
and you notice that now and again
approximately 50% of the time it goes
straight through the mirror that's the
nature of a half sealed mirror you keep
repeating it sometimes it reflects and
sometimes it goes through and
approximately 50% of the time it goes
through and 50% of the time it bounces
off that's what
happens that's what a halfed mirror
determines the world is like when it
comes to these
photons so Cedric said what exactly
determines whether it goes up or
straight bounces off or goes through the
laws of physics do okay let's get into
that what do I mean the laws of physics
well I
mean
why when you fire a single Photon at a
regular mirror it bounces off what's
going on there this is the point at
which the optical phys is go oh gosh
don't ask me that it's too hard to
explain I looked into this when I was at
Uni because before I cared about half
silver mirrors I wanted to know how a
regular Mirror Works that's hard right
why if you fire a photon at any anything
else that's not a
mirror you don't get perfect
reflection the photon hits us you can't
look at a wall and see yourself in the
wall right but there are some surfaces
where you look
and you see yourself perfectly reflected
what's the difference well understanding
why you don't see yourself in a wall
when you look that is easier to explain
what's going on there literally is there
are photons of light you know hitting my
face right
now reflecting off my face in all
directions hitting a wall and then when
they hit the wall they go off in all
directions as well so no wonder you
can't see
yourself one of the most boring parts of
an undergraduate first year Physics
degree is something called geometric
optics where you assume light travels as
rays and you can draw pictures of how
the light rays pass through lenses and
mirrors and you can draw this stuff and
you figure out oh that's
why things are magnified in some lenses
this is why some mirrors invert things
turn things upside down all this comes
out of geometric optics so that's
understandable and an undergraduate
first year physics student should be
able to explain this to
you when it comes
to individual photons then stuff gets
harder because what's going on well you
you're literally you're firing your
Photon at an
atom so in under normal circumstances
what happens is the photon hits the atom
it hits an
electron usually causing the electron to
increase its
energy I'm simplifying this and the
electron moves up an energy level we say
so it's it's orbiting the nucleus at a
particular distance from the nucleus
gets hit by a photon and instead of
orbiting it here it then
goes bigger orbit gains more energy the
orbit goes further out okay so there it
is you know now it's orbiting big but
it's unstable at that point and so after
some time of instability it releases the
photon again the photon it just absorbed
that caused it to go from small radius
orbit to Big Radius orbit this increase
in energy is then released causing the
Big Radius orbit to decrease down to
small radius orbit again and off goes
the photon being released again but the
thing about that
is that decrease in the radius of the
orbit and the emission a photo emission
the emission of a
photon causes the emission of the photon
to
be to go off in
a kind of a random Direction you can't
predict where it's going to go so it
just go shooting off
hither or thither
anywhere and that explains why when you
look at a wall you can't see yourself in
the wall because the photons being fired
at it are coming back at you in
different
directions but in a mirror they're not
coming back in different directions they
you're firing them and they're reliably
coming back exactly the same way why is
that aha I don't know I I genuinely
don't know and I've never heard a good
explanation as to why
mirrors fire straight back at you right
whatever Direction you fire that Photon
at it gets absorbed all the same laws of
physics
apply except uniquely with mirrors it's
coming straight back at you why I don't
know I don't know at the quantum level
what's going on there uh I need to sit
with someone for a while but to be
honest with you I've never
been patient enough or fascinated enough
to persevere with the explanation
and and I've never heard a good quantum
mechanical explanation of
this why mirrors
work and so so
therefore when it comes to
Cedric's further
complication yeah why is this half
silvered mirror causing perfect
reflection or Transmissions half of the
time well we've got to understand first
why a regular mirror would do such a
thing and I can't even explain to you
why a regular mirror does what it does
all I can say when it comes to this
quantum mechanical effect with half s
mirrors is the fact is 50% of the time
it goes through and 50% of the time
bounces
back and that's deterministic that's
determined by the laws of
physics okay I need another um
two-minute break or something like that
I
shall once again
return
okay 640
all right so we've been
going for an hour and
40 let me bring this to a close 20 more
minutes or so we'll get through the last
few questions Benjamin
again all right Benjamin uh he's asked
quote can you comment on the philosophy
of Brook Spinoza wow that's a high bar
his armor day
intellectual seems to foreshadow pan
epistemology in some respects but it's
very different than others indeed the
idea of its Turtles all the way down has
been used in associate with spota
referring to an infinite chain of
explanatory causal events is somewhat
suggestive of Poppa's notion that
objective truth will never be completely
comprehensible end quote yeah I agree
with that part I mean yeah he uh you
know
spot uh didn't think that the final
ultimate truth truth could be gred by
humans so we can go that far with him I
don't think he
really got close to POA notion of an
epistemology POA credits can't Emanuel
can't you know not exactly a
contemporary of Spinosa but you know
similar
era uh as as getting
closer quite close indeed I think Papa
gives K too much credit to be honest but
who am I you know to to debate with the
master POA
about the origins of of his own
philosophy spota I could spend you know
an hour on spinza I like spinza a lot of
people don't like
spinza excommunicated so far as I know
um by the
rabbis uh because he denuded the notion
of God so
much that
basically the rabbis and others thought
that he was arguing for atheism kind of
was you
know Einstein and others have been
described as being Believers in the
style of
Spinoza Spinoza wasn't a believer you
know he inv he talked about God all the
time and you read his work and he's like
invoking God but really his his notion
of God is just like the laws of
physics it's nature it's it's
um it's God and name
only Gino God in name only
um
so yeah I could I
could talk more about span but I'm not
going to right now let's save that for
another
time
uh as I say I really like I like his
style like the way he
writes it's it's a it's a real journey
when you read him but a lot of these
classical guys
are apologies for the noise outside
[Music]
um is Sydney on a Friday night people
going
out um there's a lot of the these these
guys that I really
like is that
audible uh but they're actually being
translated into English but the
translations are beautiful their style
of writing even without being translated
is is is it's a beautiful Journey that
you can go on I always talk about dayart
with respect to this day
cart's work the translations is just
breathtaking and now when you read it
and you sit with it and you you need
time and one wonderful thing about
University for all of its flaws is you
have that time to just
sit and read and many people never do
have that time but if you can find the
time sit and read some of these classic
philosophers the meditations of daycard
is one of the first I recommend to
people because it's just a fun ride to
go on humor is another one on personal
identity I love that as
well um lebet
select readings there but he does stuff
on Free Will that's
brilliant uh freedom and determinism
yeah he tried to square the circle of
because he believed in God and he
thought the universe was
deterministic uh so he can substitute
God therefore the laws of physics and he
tried to square that with but humans
have free will so how do you marry up
these two things it's the same as the
problem the today compatibilists like me
have it's like how do you Brad Hall
like Daniel denner how do
you square the circle off but
everything's determined according to the
laws of physics on your vision but at
the same time humans have free will you
can't have both well Leets actually got
their first he figured this out he used
different words and he talked about God
and whatever else but the argument is so
much
different okay that's that um Spinosa is
on a par with these guys he's more he's
harder to understand like those guys are
hard to understand spinos is another
level altogether and I like Clarity in
writing so why would I like spino when
he's not
clear because he's just one of these
guys where you need to spend time
understanding him unlike vien Stein
right viin I think is deliberately
obtuse in a way I like his style I like
spot it's a whole other
thing uh so let's leave that behind um
Okay so we've dealt with Benjamin Cedric
Sebastian's many
questions
um Andrew let's move to Andrew now
Andrew Glee
uh he has asked quote I saw David post a
rather sad tweet yesterday Wednesday the
27th of September referring to missed
opportunities for someone to commission
him to develop a successful series to
the ascent of Man by Jacob panowski he
said quote for many years I told every
media person I met
that I want to do a kind of sequel some
interest no takers now I'm not up to it
it's a grueling task end
quote it feels like this should be made
if only because the ideas David presents
are many of our best ideas and more
people could be improving their lives
and making faster progress if they knew
of them what has to be done who in your
opinion would be a good candidate if not
David himself would you consider it end
quote it's very nice of you Andrew um I
could never possibly put myself forward
for something like that or consider
myself alongside David um someone needs
to do this
absolutely someone in the style of David
Deutsch okay so David's not up to
it but you
know if we could have him as a
consultant if we could have him
appear um remotely hey look I was it
wasn't this wonderful to
see uh Mark Zuckerberg being interviewed
by yet again by Lex fredman today and
they were doing it in the metaverse and
it was wonderful my goodness have a look
at that if you can I'm speaking
September
29th
2023 easy to find this podcast of Lex
fridman interviewing Mark Zuckerberg and
you know Lex fredman who is familiar
with tech his mind was blown by the fact
they were having a simulated
conversation but it felt as if they were
in the room together even though they
were separated by thousands of
kilometers because I wearing the
headsets it was brilliant it's brilliant
I haven't finished watching the whole
thing but if Lex was blown blown away
and I was really impressed by just the
quality of the video and all this
stuff this could be what David could
do and he wouldn't have to write the
script or anything but could just give
ideas and could be interviewed and so he
could participate and I think this is
something that people should work
towards absolutely I agree with you it's
very sad um like really
sad someone needs to do a successor
series to the ascent of Man by
bernaski
um who there's no other philosophy out
there that there is nothing else no
one else is producing the kind of
optimism that is there I see people who
are otherwise optimists the Matt Ridley
of the world the Steven Pinker of the
world anyone who's an objectivist and
you don't have to scratch the surface
much and you find they're
pessimists they're not in the mold of
David
Deutch
or Browski so you need someone I
hesitate to use the word schooled but
who understands where David is coming
from and where Browski was coming from
that human
beings are never mind the ascent of man
are the
Pinnacle of what can exist
cosmically of what it is capable of
evolution to produce as far as life is
concerned because of this idea of
universality even Browski didn't get
that deuts has gone beyond bras because
I keep saying de goes beyond all these
guys who inspired
him of course I concede he's
modest even though he says he's not but
you know to combine and even though he
he I think he rejects the idea that he's
in the same league
Fineman or Einstein I agree okay it's
not he's not like Einstein granted no
one's like
Einstein but in terms of a
mind he's got qualities of fan qualities
of churing Poa
Browski name your intellectuals and he
puts them all together into one living
person there has been no one else like
this in the history of humanity and he's
still
alive we're got to this is why I say I
devote my life to
this I I don't have an
answer to any of this of what is to be
done who in your opinion will be a good
candidate if not David himself um I
think it have to be a combin of
people Sam kers is
brilliant one of David doesn't have
students but you know young colleague
Kiara
malleta add her to the
list Lully
tannant I
I I'm not of that caliber in any way
shap or form but I think together a
group of people who understood the work
of David deuts together could
perhaps do this something like
this produce something better than
Browski did perhaps maybe I don't know
so there's more to say on
that uh thanks Andrew it's a great
question I hope to come back to that um
yeah Mo isy has asked
quotes I'd love to hear more about your
career history what your day-to-day
looks like now how do you support
yourself as an independent researcher
end quote
um okay Mo uh thank you interesting
question I don't know how interesting
this is to other people though
but oh look it's not interesting I can
go into this again some other time let
me just give this very short shift now a
two-minute version you know and I've
talked about this so many times for
basically the story is I was a
regular science
student uh who had to support themselves
at
University uh you know my parents were
of course huge support but I wasn't just
as a lot of people I knew at the
time and many people at University today
they have the great privilege Lucky them
of not needing to work
they can just get through uni whether
it's on a scholarship or whether because
their parents support them or whatever I
wasn't quite in that category I had to
work I had to work hard I had to be a
security guard I didn't enjoy it yeah in
retrospect I did I've got these cool
stories to tell but at the time I didn't
enjoy it I mean it was long days at
University five days a week and then
going to work at the security job and
then I went on for like six years and
then eventually I got a job working for
the University
itself um as a science Communicator
quite a prestigious role and I I loved
it but it didn't pay it I mean it paid
but it paid minimally I wish I could
have kept doing that I would have loved
it but the only thing I could think of
doing aside from doing yet more physics
which didn't pay and I didn't have the
money to do a PhD didn't have money to
do a master's at that time the only
thing I could think of doing uh was
teaching
uh and I enjoyed that I didn't see
anything morally wrong with that at at
the time I just thought this is an
extension of being a science
communicator but of course there was
something wrong with it it was
coercive and took me a while to figure
that out but I was a teacher for a long
time near the two
decades so that that's what I did know
for most the time um I worked as a tutor
teacher I never wanted to you know move
up the hierarchy of teaching anything
like
that uh I I refused all promotional
opportunities that were offered to
me and so I just never
made much money I never wanted to do
anything other than you know talk to
people about science and maths and
philosophy and all that stuff that's
what I love
doing and then it became increasingly
more difficult to square the circle of
taking children seriously of of of
treating children as adults and
fulfilling the requirements of what
teaching demands of a
teacher being coercive being a you know
by the book sort of
person and so ultimately I failed as a
teacher but in terms
of needing to do something else and
so I I found
this how do I support myself I don't
support myself as an independent
researcher I have some I'm extremely
fortunate to have
benefactors
and very generous person who supports me
and I I do other work for Beyond simply
producing this kind of
stuff um and I have my
patrons so I've got a
benefactor that amount and then I have
patrons more like that you the 10% on
top is the P patrons I I I would love to
be truly
independent but I'm not truly
independent yet
maybe one day maybe one day I'll have
enough resources to do this properly on
my own but there yeah that's why I'm for
now I don't support myself as an
independent researcher I um work with
others uh okay so that's one part of my
patrons answered let me quickly go to
the other patrons I've
got a fellow
called Reed hi Reed Reed's brand new
Reed
has uh reion out there in the live
stream I let me just
check I didn't see anyone called Reed
turn up there Reed I really appreciate
you joining um my Pon page and again
another advertisement for anyone else
who wants to join help me be that in
truly independent researcher that Mo was
insinuating I was quite not yet
um
Reed has joined my patreon
yesterday and Reed I appreciate it I I
genuinely do I hope you remain a patron
but so far Reed hasn't actually
contributed anything
to my to being a patron that's fine
looks like
Reed you're staying in front of the
Opera House so you're aussy it's great
but you've also asked a question and
again I appreciate it but it suggests to
me you don't know much about me my work
and you're brand new and you're
asking I will read this I will just read
your question question and then I let
the viewers and listeners judge for
themselves what Reed is saying
quote what do you think of these Street
epistemology practitioner
assumptions we're writing a course on
Street epistemology and would love your
feedback much
appreciated everyone exists within a
shared reality truth is objective and is
different than subjective opinion
everyone is fallible and has
biases people form models of reality
with varying degrees of accuracy people
use methods with varying degrees of
quality to check their models of
reality people create words and Define
their
meaning improving the quality of
people's models of reality is beneficial
collaboratively questioning our models
of reality helps to mitigate our biases
and improve these
models higher conf confidence in a claim
should correspond to higher quality
reasons virtually everyone is
emotionally resilient enough to have
their core beliefs
challenged feel free to add your
thoughts here if if this isn't a good
fit for the live stream and it's linked
to a Google doc thanks again end quote
so readed that's all nice again I say
for you know a third time I I really
appreciate your support but at the same
time how can I say this
um on the one hand it seems like you're
asking me to do your
[Laughter]
[Applause]
homework whether it's University or
anywhere else and on the
other you may not be familiar with my
back
catalog that's fine you know I've been
talking for over two hours now so maybe
I'm I'm kind of losing it at this point
but yeah I explicitly talk about how
you've talked about confidence there I
explicitly say confidence is
not anything to do with
epistemology what do I think of these
straight epistemology practitioner
assumptions okay this is the what's his
name Peter
bosan this philosopher that wanders the
streets hassling people well not really
h in pill but you know wanting to talk
to people about usually woke ideology
stuff like that or whatever it happens
to be and it's like what do I think
about
that I don't know to me it it's a little
bit
like just the rationalist version of you
know the street evangelist
whether they're
Christian or Muslim let's face it those
are the two ones that are out there
yelling at you um with megaphones
telling you to come and join their
religion whatever you think about
Judaism hey they don't do that they're
not trying to recruit
people not challenging people wandering
down the
street Christians do this Muslims do
this
Harry krishnas do this to some
extent all sorts of people do this and
now Peter bosan does this too fine
people can do whatever they
want but as far as his epistemology goes
when it comes to Street epistemology
stuff well I don't like it I mean it's
Justified true belief he wants people to
justify their assumption so I don't like
it I agree truth is objective and
different than subjective opinion but
that's not my standard it's what your
stands for knowledge knowledge is
different to truth so again you know
this is oh I'm rubbing my temples here
because it's for me it's
just it's kind of stressful and
uh fans
know fans of mine know um what I think
about all this stuff you've said
improving the quality of people's models
of reality is beneficial of course it is
can't disagree with
that virtually everyone is emotionally
resilient enough to have their core
beliefs
challenged I don't know maybe they are
maybe they're not n these are all your
things that you want me to let me have a
look at his just for fun come on
everyone let's have a look at his Google
doc copy and paste and see what he has
to say his Google doc this is must be a
university assignment that he's got here
and he wants me
to oh
my no
no okay let me so
he's okay um I'm just trying to
understand what I'm reading reading here
so he's just copied and pasted into
Patron patreon um this series of
claims
um all about
comparing comparing critical rationalism
to Street epistemology well are they
compatible well there's there's a whole
bunch of things on which they will
agree but it's more important about what
they disagree where they disagree
look do I think Street epistemology and
vanilla
rationality is
better than dogmatism absolutely do I
think it's better than religion
yeah however that said it's m in
misconception the whole notion of core
belief that you mentioned there wrong
models of reality no I talk in terms of
good explanations and theories rather
than belief I talk about knowledge um
rather than
confidence uh I talk about evaluating
stuff whether you have you don't need
com it's not about
emotion so anyway there's too much here
to talk about I'm afraid Reed and maybe
next time I do a live stream if you're
still a patron then we can talk
but let's let's narrow down some of
those uh things there and i' I'd love to
you know talk about it in detail so if
you come back to me on patreon then
maybe I'll do a live stream uh answering
to some of this I think it could be
interesting and
helpful
um let me
see
[Music]
um I'm I'm just going to oh okay so
rather than Twitter let me
instead go
to YouTube and
quickly have a look at the questions
that have been asked
here a&k has said in the
chat sir I want to know if someone tells
what kind of evidence do you accept what
are the parameters for an Evidence so I
want to understand what exactly is
evidence what is evidence
okay by the way fans of
mine the prefix is really what is really
true what exactly is evidence they
they're useless words you don't need to
say you can just say what is evidence
what is true what is knowledge what is
really knowledge okay these things add
nothing and while I'm on what my fans
shouldn't shouldn't do I hate to
admonish people
but can we stop using deian it's not a
word it really it genuinely isn't it's
um you know there's no such thing as
deut in physics or deut in philosophy or
DOI in epistemology there just isn't
there's no einsteinian physics there's
general
relativity
there's there's just good explanations
and you don't need to attach them to the
name of a person much less in terms of
philosophy and epistemology yeah sure we
talk about poian epistemology it's a
misnomer though POA didn't have much of
a problem with it but strictly speaking
we talk about critical rationalism and
better than that I just talk about aist
esy how do we understand
epistemology I can talk about all the
ways of understanding epistemology and
guess what most of the best ways come
from POA augmented by David Deutsch and
we can talk about optimism then we talk
about the style of optimism that David
Deutsch has given us but we don't need
to say it's deutan because that
introduces a subjective notion to it so
there's a whole bunch of you know I'm
not huge on policing language use
whatever terms you want I'm just telling
you that there's certain
things that it tells for me about
well I don't
know we don't need to use the word
exactly and really we don't need to use
the word dutan what is evidence evidence
is physical data which can be used to
decide between theories or provide a
problem or be the thing that is
explained by a
theory that's what evidence is evidence
is some sort of physical
thing the wavelength of light the
intensity of light the loudness of sound
the frequency of
sound the pH of water the
concentration of salt what it name your
thing okay so it just
becomes Broad speaking evidence
is physical
data it must be quantifiable in the
physical sciences that's
evidence it must be
interpreted evidence is Theory Laden you
need to understand where it comes from
so when you talk about ah the frequency
or intensity of light some instrument
must must have measured that and so you
must have a a theory and explanation of
how the instrument
works and what frequency of light even
means so all of this stuff okay so so
when you say exactly is evidence I don't
know what you mean by exactly all I can
say is that's what evidence is move
on uh Alexander says it would be good if
we can see the question you are
answering I agree let me figure out how
to do that at some point it's just oh my
goodness it's hard enough to get me to
do this to get this set up I mean I'm
not just not a
yeah one day when I'm earning the big
dollars with this then I will but at the
moment goodness um I need someone to
help honestly I need I need a person who
will can be my offside and figure this
stuff out for me it's just so much for
me to produce the content in
general uh making videos reading so much
stuff that I read in order to comment
on um
so all of that's operating right in the
background and then setting up the live
stream right and I've got all this
software that I know can simcast to Here
on YouTube which is where it's happening
now on
Twitter on Facebook on other platforms I
got this software but for the life of me
I can't get it to work simultaneously
and I sit there for an hour and it's
like this is an hour of my time gone
on so it's another thing it's like
adding to that this issue of can I
project to the question over there I
guess I could
try and then when I mess it up
ah it's just going to frustrate me and
distract me from literally doing the
thing which is answering the question so
um yeah I read them out hey uh and I'm
starting to also do the thing on Twitter
of just cutting you know the recording
of this and then I'll put the question
up so there's that but I apologize
Alexander I'll try and do
better
zle Z has asked
zlc how come people sometimes ignore the
knowledge they have Acquired and go
against the better judgment this seems
to contradict the idea that one's
knowledge is there one can't really
choose end quote um
because not all knowledge is
explicit and so the knowledge they have
acquired you say well you're talking
about the explicit knowledge and against
their better judgment well you've got
you can people are not perfectly
coherent
automatons we are not robots we are not
AI we're not perfectly obedient we don't
even know what we're thinking half the
time we're a mess of contradiction and
problems that's the way to think of the
human
mind yeah when when you think
of other versions of the mind you know
Matt Ridley I just mentioning him the
rational
Optimist Steven Pinker
rationality Daniel caraman won the Nobel
prize in economics for talking about how
you know we make decisions all of these
people kind
of converge on this idea that we should
be by being more rational we need to be
more
coherent have a single idea about
rationality and act on that you know
this is what this is echoing here
zik David do has a different perspective
and if you go to my YouTube and you look
at my questions for David I ask him a
question about the nature of the human
mind and it is beautiful and it needs
more I need to have him unpacked this
and you know he he's writing a book
about this
um it's the next question the next
question is is David deuts still
developing his book he provisionally
called irrational end quote as far as I
know absolutely yes so he's he's busy
with that a lot of the
time and so that answer comes to bear on
you know if you go to my YouTube channel
and you find the question for David it's
about the nature of mine in mind um he
talks there about and you get you get
this in the beginning Infinity you get
part of this in just his tweets and
various other places and me increasingly
as I understand this perspective
more human beings are
not perfectly rational we're not
computation machines we are creative we
have problems and we come up with these
Solutions and the solution can
contradict each other and we're just a
mess
a mess in a good way and a bad way
sometimes it's important that we be able
to be filled with contradictions and we
act against our better judgment what is
our better judgment it's hard to
tell your rational mind and all of your
explicit explanations might be telling
you to do X but you have an intuition an
emotional feeling that maybe why is
better and you do why is that completely
irrational I don't think so no and the
reason I don't think so is
because all of that explicit explanation
about
X you've noticed a problem now if it's
Landing an airplane I'd say go with X
right but there's all sorts of reasons
why
look you're thinking
about having a relationship with someone
and on paper you know people talk about
this whole time on paper you know he or
she is perfect for me meets all my
criteria that's my better judgment stick
with this
person they've asked me to go out and I
see no reason not
to except that I have this feeling that
I can't
explain that I don't want to I don't
know what it is they're gorgeous and
they're smart and they're funny and they
just all my friends like them and my
family loves them and
everything I like
them but there just something there that
I can't put my finger on that makes me
want to say no what should I do you say
no why well because you you have an
unanswered problem you might say yes to
try and figure it out okay you might go
okay let me go on a date with this
person just to finally figure out what
it is that I've gives me the
Eek that's the kind of thing I'm talking
about though
here one can choose you say this seems
to contradict the idea that one's
knowledge is there one can't really
choose you can't like I'm saying here
you you're in this two minds right all
of your explicit explanations telling
you to X but on the other hand there's
this feeling that makes you want to do
why you you actually have the choice
there you genuinely do have the choice
in ways that people
don't understand I would say
normally Pinker might say
well you know you got to be
rational ignore those feelings something
like that maybe he wouldn't I don't know
I don't know what he would say about
this I mean speak for him I would say
you have a problem and you need an
explanation and you shouldn't coerce
yourself there's a whole bunch of things
I would say here but you have a
choice you might want more
data go out on the date with the
person or or you don't want to coer
yourself you don't need to get the data
yet so you say no you've still got an
open
problem you're choosing let's good going
um
Levi hi Levi no Levi well Levi asked me
a
question another Forum let me just
check to
see
uh no you didn't
um um so Levi has asked a perceptive
question and he said that one of the
craziest things is we explain the scene
in terms of the Unseen however you also
do that in pseudo science I it can be
perverted to involve woo
woo question mark uh so I don't agree
that that's what you do in
pseudoscience because there's nothing
actually unseen there with a good
explanation there is something unseen
there that can be tested
for that you can rule out that is
necessarily invoked as existing by what
you
see the only way of understanding going
to my Trope example again
of why it is that that intensity and
that frequency and that distribution of
light that you get from the sun is
coming from the Sun can only be
explained in terms of these
particular hardto vary set of nuclear
reactions going on in the core of the
Sun at a particular
rate of a particular number quantity
in a certain volume of space all of that
can't be seen but it must be so highly
precise and if you really wanted to
narrow things down there's scans you can
do of the sun to really constrain things
right so that's one thing you can
measure a whole bunch of stuff
there but that's nothing like nothing
like Homeopathy where the argument is
water carries with it the memory of
substances passed through so all the
virtue of Rosemary is kept within the
water even if you you know make a
rosemary tea highly concentrated
rosemary tea and then you dilute dilute
dilute dilute 100 times supposed to be
highly powerful right 100 times dilution
but you can show chemically speaking
with calculations that after 100 times
of
diluting by by the way by 100 times
diluting I mean you take your rosemary
tea right so you've made tea from
Rosemary and then you take
a one 100th of that so 1% of that out
and you put you know for one part of
that you put 100 parts of water and
you've got a new thing highly dilute but
now you take one part of that and then
you put a new 100 parts of water on top
of that and you repeat that process is
100 times and what you've got is 100
times dilution by the end of that and
you can calculate to show there is
absolutely nothing of that original t
left in the final 100th bit you've got
now these Homeopathy people they've gone
to a lot of work in order to produce
that 100 dilutions who can trust that
that's what they really do but you know
these people are
whatever there's the Unseen thing
namely the memory of
the Rosemary that is supposed to be in
the water at the end of that is
demonstrably not there it's demonstrably
not there this
memory of the water how does it
work never mind the Unseen things
there's unanswered
questions there's problems with no
Solutions so yeah all pseudo science is
like that it's not like real science so
it's not unseen stuff it's unexplained
stuff um Levis also said but doesn't
information need to travel the length
the size of the system so this is all
that stuff about entanglement another
way to look at this Levi as well is if
you've got these two objects separated
in the Galaxy you know A and B 120,000
light years apart then in order to check
in order to check that in fact the one
that's now revealed to be
up uh is still entangled with the one
said to be now down is you have to bring
them together and how do you do that
well you got to bring them together okay
you have to do that and so no there's no
information that travels the length of
the size of the system that just doesn't
happen either they're prepare prepared
together in which case they were
together at some point in the past or
they're brought together at some point
in the future in either case they're
brought
together but you don't need to bring
them together for the argument to hold
namely that the information is there
distributed in both in the entangled
system let's not revisit go over old
ground D Lee hi Brett long time lurker
and fellow Sydney out of here hi hope
you answer some question from YouTube I
Heard the phrase intelligence is
lossless compression in passing any idea
what this means I think it's in relation
to the hutter
prize oh look I'm really running out of
time now it's like an hour and a half I
could go into this but
um I think lossless compression I think
it's just better to say intelligence is
this binary capacity to explain any
in the universe in
principle let me just leave it there Tim
Johnson but I'll come back to you D I
don't want to give you that short of
shift at some point just ask again next
um become a patron ask me there and I'll
definitely spend more time on it
else next live stream which won't be too
long Tim Johnson when we look at a MEAP
Parc in the local Universe we can
compute a density of matter per megap
passet okay when we say the density is
the same throughout the whole universe
is this observed or assumed end
quote
ah who says the density is the same
throughout the whole universe it's not
obviously you just look the universe has
structure it's called the large scale
structure of the universe the famous
part of
cosmology bits
there is filaments and voids so to speak
take a have a look have a look at a map
of type in large scale structure
Universe map and you see this very
complicated
web of galaxies in some places there are
literally zero galaxies like the center
of a bubble and in some places there are
lots of galaxies like on the surface of
a bubble this is telling it's revealing
and what it suggests to many quantum
cosmologist is even there in the larger
structures you have
reflected in those the biggest possible
things in the universe how vast clusters
superclusters of galaxies are
distributed
those resemble the smallest structures
that exist in existence one resembles
the other they both look like bubbles
you might have heard of quantum foam
before look that up the quantum foam
looks kind of like the distribution of
galaxies what's going on there what's
going on there well because once upon a
time the entire universe was Tiny enough
to be subject to quantum foam and so
when you had this
sudden expansion everything got
magnified all the matter
flew um out expanding space expanded
taking the matter with
it
preserving what it was like at the
beginning so if it was Bubbles at the
beginning it's going to look like
bubbles now and at every Point
henceforth that's amazing that's
absolutely that was one of the most
mindblowing things I think I ever
encountered at
University that the explanation of the
large scale structure of the
universe is in terms
of why quantum foam the smallest thing
we know about looks the way it does wow
um
now you can can compute a density of
matter per Mega paric yeah okay is it
the same throughout the whole universe
yeah I could go into that but I'm not
going to WR that I think what I've
already said is far more fascinating a
fact about
reality um ttis hi Brett what do you you
think is the most significant
Improvement Deutch makes over POA
thought are there are many there are
many me personally I like the idea of
the person as the universal explainer
uniting together any alien intelligence
that's out there and AGI with human
beings and any of our extent not extent
extinct um cousins or ancestors who also
had this capacity all of us had this
capacity for Universal
explanation in a parsimonious way David
has explained what a person is this is
something the Ancients struggled over
and the classic philosophers struggled
over and people today just do not
appreciate and I think it stands aside
his contributions in Quantum computation
and everything else he's gifted the
world Constructor Theory and all of that
stuff
as of equal significance telling us what
a person is when I I got to meet David
for the first time it was the thing that
I I gushed over the most I said this is
amazing you've answered this question
because hither to I hadn't heard anyone
praising him for this and I'm like this
is the thing I
studied philosophy at Uni that's I raved
about I would go on about it all these
different philosophers would talk about
what is a person what makes us different
say morality that would say emotions
everything here was David explaining it
in terms of epistemology and physics and
computation goodness so that's my choice
the other
things I I still think you know David
would say oh footnotes to poer but you
know good explanation the emphasis there
and what it is as hard to
vary I think that is a that's not a
footnote that's a big thing we could go
into that so there's there's
two um the very next comment
on YouTube is Alexander saying the
difference is we have the ability to
create abstract Concepts that further
creates language memory laughter
planning Etc yes yeah okay but those are
merely special cases of universal
explanation that's
all someone from Japan has said if I
want to study about David's work is
philosophy Department the best no it's
the last place you'd want to go no buy
his book books the fabric of reality the
beginning of infinity watch everything
you can that he's ever done on YouTube
he could spend hours there uh looking in
interviews and things and then maybe
augment it with some of mine and that
will give you
everything and more that any University
possibly
could same person has asked I cannot
read Japanese I want to hear your
thoughts on life complex systems and the
relationship between these fields and
epistemology it's all I talk
[Laughter]
about I talk about that all the time so
tune in to toast I won't go into it now
thanks D le is giving me a Super Chat
the one for today $5 thanks um and he's
thanked me thank you I appreciate your
efforts we'll join patreon soon thank
you when I have income no problem at all
um yes I
understand jemy mcarter has said hi
Brett found you via Naval deut yourself
I'm about halfway through the beginning
of infinity very Illuminating having
yourself nval unpack has been very
helpful thank you thank you Jeremy for
being a
fan thank you to everyone that brings me
to the end of the all the questions
except for those on Twitter oh I'm gonna
I'm G to be upset if I don't look at
Twitter and I know it's just going to be
it's going to irritate me if I don't
actually look um
so let's have a
look Tim parer has asked on Twitter can
you speak about why David deuts does not
believe the human brain uses Quantum
effects for calculations okay first part
of the answer there is I don't know I
can't speak for David I can only give
you what my explanation is he goes on to
ask also any observations about lucid
dreaming DMT and other psychedelic
visions and how that might have
something to do with accessing other
worlds like that factorization proof end
quote um okay let's doal with the first
part why don't I think the human brain
uses Quantum effects for calculations
because I have some understanding of
what it takes to do Quantum computation
from an engineering perspective out at
the University of New South Wales
they're traling this the only way they
can figure
out for the thing for the system to
remain entangled we're talking about
entanglement a lot before and you need
these cubit to remaining Tangled to do
the computation is to have the thing at
very low temperature then like when I
say low I mean among the lowest
temperatures in the
universe in these fridges at these
research departments where they're doing
this stuff I don't know of a quantum
computer where that's not the case and I
mean real quantum computer not things
like Google's d-wave or whatever big
Corporation claims to have a quantum
computer or the latest nature article
that claims Quantum com I mean I want to
see you something like what the
University of New South Wales does their
Center for Quantum
computation uh or Oxford University
their Center for Quantum computation
where they're actually trying to build
these things and they're telling you
what they're doing and they're saying
low temperature blah blah blah all of
that tells
me
that these things are possible they're
hard they're going to be low
temperature I just don't see how you can
avoid the
noise to utilize Quantum
effects in the human brain which is very
noisy it's
hot it's hot I mean it's what 36 degrees
CS we're talking about Building Systems
that isus
270 3 degrees C it's a massive
difference so yeah that's
why the human brain is unlikely to use
quantum effects and it's unlikely to be
a quantum computer it's just a classical
computer you don't
need you know Evolution doesn't need to
have taken advantage of of that you can
you can you can get by with
classical Tim's further gone to talk
about lucid dreaming DMT and other
psychic Visions might that have
something
to do with accessing other worlds no we
don't need that I mean yeah those things
can have a reality of their own they can
be talked about in their own terms but
we don't need to invoke them in order to
explain how it is that we come to
understand the Multiverse
or mathematics or anything like that
they might reveal something about
Consciousness but I don't think
they I would say I know they don't teach
us anything further about the Multiverse
and quantum theory that we can't get via
rational sober means
honestly I think that when people have
these psychedelic experiences they are
profound but they're also the very
experience is that can be
misinterpreted
reliably
okay who else has asked something
here uh tibolt can't fear be positive in
a dynamic Society fear provokes
criticisms
uh
uh I guess it becomes an issue when F an
argument for suppressing debate but
otherwise I don't see it as
wrong so why is he saying
this oh because I've said
something
that
in oh I was talking about
how so often online advances in Tech
like advances in AI are talked about as
if they're scary this scary new thing
you whenever you see a headline this
breathless headline about um you know
here's this here's this new AI bot
that's able
to perfectly well translate English into
Spanish and it's like scary new wayi
development what's scary about that's
brilliant that's wonderful everything is
being reported as scary these days and I
don't like
that I said but what's scary is that
even in Dynamic societies um the forces
for stasis wield such power so
anti-rational memes so that's what
scares me if anything you've got the
udis and Bostrom of the world saying we
need to slow down progress that scares
me uh and so going back to what tibolt
says can't fear be positive in a dynamic
Society well yeah like I just said okay
I'm fearful of
them there's all sorts of ways in which
fear can be positive in a dynamic
Society I'm afraid of genuine Nazis I'm
afraid of genuine authoritarians and
that fear is a powerful motivator for me
to not let them have their way and I
think everyone should be scared of that
so yeah of
course no one ever said otherwise jittin
what is
boredom
I should have prepared I I just liked
this question and then I failed to keep
it on my mind and now time has run out
and I've I'm getting hungry it's 2 hours
and 40 minutes now and thirsty and I
need a cup of tea and so on it
goes
boredom is a problem I would say it's a
misunderstanding of your
circumstance it's not
recognizing that
there's something there
to have fun with namely the ideas in
your
mind you might be stuck in a hospital
having to wait you might be stuck in all
sorts of uncomfortable places and you
might say I'm
bored I agree with Dr Phil on this one
bored people are
boring generally speaking you've got to
be able to find something even if you
can't write or listen or whatever can't
you go inwards it's a skill to develop
so boredom is a lack of skill lack of
insight it's a
problem it's a problem with
you it's misunderstanding of
circumstance it's a lack of
knowledge a lack of knowledge about
subjectivity I rarely get bored anymore
I just
don't lucky me but I'm Not Unusual in
this I've figured out the inside you
know the inside is that there's a lot
going
on in your own
mind and if I'm given the opportunity to
be on my own for 20 minutes an hour
whatever I love it I love it's so rare
for this to
happen where I'm
unencumbered unencumbered by anything
stick me in a room on my own yeah sure
after a full day I might start to go a
little
crazy I I haven't got that level of um
Enlightenment but I'm not going to get
bored for a long time my tolerance for
boredom is going to be very very high
compared to the average
person all right um last question
absolute last question now compact owner
let's say we parked in the event horizon
of a black hole we send a crash test
dummy into it will crash test dummy
appear to freeze on the Avent R and
proceed no further from our point of
view if so does this mean we can still
see everything that has over Fallen
end quote
um look no one knows is the answer to
that some theories say yes to this you
can still see everything that's ever
fallen in I think this was part of the
theory of interstellar that the
holographic principle holds that somehow
the light is kept there on the surface
of the black hole in some way but the
most vanilla answer is no everything
that goes in it's one way and you don't
even get a preservation of the last
moment it's just gone everything's
destroyed the light's gone the
information is lost to the universe end
of that's it um so now uh after one hour
and
45 2 hours and 45 minutes 2 hours 45
minutes uh I'm going to say goodbye
thank you everyone um it has been a
wonderful wonderful time uh and I'm
sorry if I seemed at all impatient at
any point I'm sorry if at any point I
seemed as
if um I was sort of losing it but yeah
it has been 2 hours 45 um wonderful
questions uh modulo people asking me
stuff that clearly indicated this the
first time they've ever tuned in to
anything I've said hello Tom hard friend
from um Twitter um but until next time
byebye
everyone